Bloom gelatine – Sprinkle gelatine powder over 1/2 cup cold milk in a small saucepan, stir, and let stand for 5 minutes to swell and become lumpy. This step is called “blooming” and ensures the gelatine melts smoothly in the next step.

💡 I use milk (not water) to avoid diluting flavour, and do it straight in the saucepan to save washing up.

Melt gelatine – Put the saucepan over medium low heat and warm the mixture so the gelatine melts and the mixture turns into liquid, lump-free milk again. ⚠️ Do not let the milk boil, this can kill the gelatine setting power. Gelatine melts at a low ~35°C/95°F so it only needs to be lightly warmed.


Dissolve sugar – Add the sugar, vanilla of your choice*, a pinch of salt and the milk. Mix just until the milk warms up enough for the sugar to dissolve (rub between your fingers to check) then remove from the stove. Don’t warm the milk up too much else it will form a skin when it cools (next step) which you’ll have to strain out when pouring into the moulds. ⚠️And remember, do not let the milk boil!

Bloom vanilla flavour + add cream – Remove the saucepan from the stove. Let it sit 10 minutes (to draw out the vanilla flavour) then stir in the cold cream. This will bring down the temperature and help speed up the next steps.

* Don’t forget the extra steps if using vanilla bean – add the used pod and steep for 30 minutes instead of 10 minutes. It’s in the recipe card.


Fridge before pouring – Pour the mixture in a jug or bowl (preferably a clear one, so you can check for sinking vanilla seeds). Then refrigerate for 1 hour, stirring well at the 30 minute and 45 minute mark, scraping the sides (to ensure it doesn’t start setting), until the mixture has a consistency like thickened cream (heavy cream) so it’s thick enough to keep the vanilla seeds suspended rather than settling on the base – see photo below for before and after. Check: Stir, set aside for 15 seconds, check the base of the jug to see if they settle. If not, we’re good to pour!

WHY I REFRIGERATE -This step makes the mixture thicken enough for the seeds to remain suspended as the Panna Cotta sets in the moulds. If you skip chilling, all the seeds will settle on the base of the mould, and it kind of looks like…well, black mould!😆 But even if you are using vanilla extract (no seeds), this step is still good to do as it avoids the “sometimes” risk of the cream and milk separating as the Panna Cotta sets.


Lightly grease moulds – Give the moulds a quick spritz of a neutral flavoured oil then lightly wipe with a paper towel. This will let your Panna Cotta slip out without dipping in warm water (which secretly, I am terrified of, having melted the surface of more than my fair share of Panna Cottas. 🫣 Two seconds too long, and you’re crying).

PS You don’t need to oil if you aren’t un-moulding.